This first draft of design discussion (#4)
thotz/cosi-driver-ceph: WORKFLOW.md

- BucketAccessRequest(namespace scoped) can be create with reference to a BucketAccessClass and BucketRequest, so user will get a BucketAccess(clusterscoped).The COSI driver will create a `s3 user` with proper access

### COSI Driver
The `user credentials` and `endpoint` need to passed as `Kubernetes Secret` to the Driver. Using that details, the driver will perform bucket operations via S3 apis and user operations via rados-admin Ops apis.

### Consuming at application
The app pod can refer BucketAccessRequest and Node adapter details as volume mount as follows:
```yaml
spec:
  containers:
      volumeMounts:
        - name: cosi-secrets
          mountPath: /data/cosi
  volumes:
  - name: cosi-secrets
    csi:
      driver: objectstorage.k8s.io
      volumeAttributes:
        bar-name: sample-bar
        bar-namespace: default
```
The adapter bootstrap the credentials into application pod, for Ceph COSI Driver credentials passed as `.aws/credentials` file into the pod.

### Integrating with Rook

> The controller, node adapter and sidecar/driver need to deployed via Rook. Rook also need to create a `cephobjectstoreuser` and refer the secret in the deployment.

Reviewer: Does the COSI driver have any usage independent from Rook? Or are only Rook scenarios going to be supported? If it's only going to be supported in Rook, I would propose:
- The COSI driver would be implemented in the Rook repo 
- The ceph-COSI driver would be started with the `rook/ceph` image, the same that is used for the operator, it would just be started with different arguments.

This way we don't have to worry about a separate build process or separate images, we can just re-use the build and release process that Rook already has.

One of the reasons the ceph-csi driver was a separate repro from rook is that the csi driver could potentially be deployed independently of Rook, even potentially for non-K8s scenarios where the csi spec would be supported. (I'm not sure it actually is used independently, but that was at least part of the motivation.) 

I'm not against a separate repo and image for the COSI driver, but if we go that direction we need to be very clear about the reasons because there is an extra cost to it.

Author: @travisn : The COSI feature has a similar motivation to CSI. AFAIR idea use in non-k8s scenarios. At the moment most of the testing effort will happen together with Rook. IMO it is better to keep as a different repo considering use case similar to CSI

Reviewer: Ok, as we learn the details of what the scenarios will be, let's capture them in this doc, thanks.

The Ceph COSI driver is similar to Ceph CSI, it implements interface between COSI enabled contianerised environment and Ceph RGW. It dynamically provision RGW buckets and access for that bucket, can attach them to workloads.

The following CRDs are defined for managing the lifecycle of Buckets:

 - BucketRequest(BR) - Represents a request to provision a Bucket
 - BucketClass(BC) - Represents a class of Buckets with similar characteristics
 - Bucket(B) - Represents a Bucket or its equivalent in the storage backend

 The following CRDs are defined for managing the lifecycle of workloads accessing the Bucket:

 - BucketAccessRequest(BAR) - Represents a request to access a Bucket
 - BucketAccessClass(BAC) - Represents a class of accessors with similar access requirements
 - BucketAccess(BA) - Represents a access token or service account in the storage backend

Similar to CSI, it has three running components :
- Controller - manages life cycle of COSI objects, watches for the requests for above mentioned objects
- Node adapter - bootstraps bucket access request to applications for their workloads
- Sidecar/Driver - receives the request and calls corresponding API in the driver

> More details and definitions can be found the [COSI Spec](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/container-object-storage-interface-spec/blob/master/spec.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More details and definitions can be found in the [COSI Spec](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/container-object-storage-interface-spec/blob/master/spec.md).
```

> Also the original [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/1979-object-storage-support) for the COSI feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The original COSI [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/1979-object-storage-support) may also be a useful reference.
```

I would make this part of the same paragraph as above also.

### Workflow

- BucketRequest(namespace-scoped) can be created with reference to a BucketClass, so user will get a Bucket(cluster-scoped). The COSI driver will create a "backend bucket" in RGW for a Bucket Request. The owner is defined based on the BucketClass. So owner will be created for the first BucketRequest on the BucketClass.

> - BucketAccessRequest(namespace-scoped) can be created with a reference to a BucketAccessClass and BucketRequest, so user will get a BucketAccess(cluster-scoped).The COSI driver will create an S3 user with proper access.

Reviewer 2: How about breaking this into more steps?

1. User makes a BucketRequest (BR) (namespace-scoped) with reference to a BucketClass (BC)
2. The COSI controller makes a request to Rook's COSI driver (via gRPC) to create a bucket.
3. Rook's COSI driver will create the bucket and return the result
4. The COSI controller creates a Bucket (cluster-scoped) for the BucketRequest (BR)
5. User makes a BucketAccessRequest (BAR) (namespace-scoped) with reference to a BucketAccessClass (BAC) and BucketRequest (BR)
6. The COSI controller makes a request to Rook's COSI driver (via gRPC) to grant access to the bucket
7. Rook's COSI driver returns S3 bucket access credentials to COSI (via gRPC)
8. The COSI controller creates a BucketAccess (BA) (cluster-scoped) for the BucketAccessRequest (BAR)

> The BC and BAC are handled by the admin and user need to create the BR and BAR out of it. The app pod is given access to the BAR, both need to running on the same namespace. Even though BR is namespace-scoped, it can be accessed in different namespace known as `allowed namespaces`. So the BAR need to part of this namespace for accessing the BR.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to fix grammar and eliminate redundant information.

```suggestion
The BC and BAC are expected to be created by the admin, and users are expected to create BRs and BARs. When an application Pod is given access to a BAR, both need to be running in the same namespace. Even though a BR is namespace-scoped, access to it is limited to a selection of allowed namespaces by the COSI controller.
```

### COSI Driver

> The user credentials and endpoint need to passed as Kubernetes Secret to the driver. Using these details, the driver will perform bucket operations via S3 APIs and user operations via RADOS Gateway administrator operations (RGW admin ops) APIs. The following are the API's defined by the driver:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The user credentials and endpoint need to be passed as a Kubernetes Secret to the driver. Using these details, the driver will perform bucket operations via S3 APIs and user operations via RADOS Gateway administrator operations (RGW admin ops) APIs. The following are the API's defined by the driver:
```

Reviewer 2: Why is this? Can't Rook figure out the credentials by querying Ceph?

Author: The Driver is not part of the Rook code base and the driver expects the credentials to be passed as secret. I am planning to add gh `https://github.com/ceph/ceph-cosi/` with help of ceph-admin. We need to smooth way to deploy this Driver from Rook like the ceph-csi

Reviewer 2: I see. Thanks.

- ProvisionerCreateBucket() - called upon create BucketRequest, the driver will create user with help of RGW admin ops API and then create a bucket using S3 API using that user.
- ProvisionerDeleteBucket() - called upon delete BucketRequest, the driver will fetch BucketInfo using RGW admin ops API, then fetch the owner info, delete bucket via S3 API using the owner.
- ProvisionerGrantBucketAccess() - called upon create BucketAccessRequest, create user with RGW admin ops API and attach the user to required bucket with help of bucket policy.
- ProvisionerRevokeBucketAccess() - called upon delete BucketAccessRequest, revoke the permission on with user and then delete the user.

```

> P.S Since there can be multiple users(BAR) attaching to the same bucket, it is not tested how much RGW scale with COSI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
P.S Since there can be multiple users (BARs) attaching to the same bucket, it is not tested how much RGW scale with COSI.
```

```

### Consuming at application

> The app pod can refer BucketAccessRequest and Node adapter details as volume mount as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users can attach buckets to application Pods by referencing a BucketAccessRequest and the COSI node adapter details as volume mount as follows:
```

```yaml
spec:
  containers:
      volumeMounts:
        - name: cosi-secrets
          mountPath: /data/cosi
  volumes:
  - name: cosi-secrets
    csi:
      driver: objectstorage.k8s.io
      volumeAttributes:
        bar-name: sample-bar
        bar-namespace: default
```
The COSI adapter sidecar injects the Ceph driver's credentials into the application pod into the mount path given (/data/cosi in the above example).

### Integrating with Rook

> The controller, node adapter and sidecar/driver need to be deployed. This design proposes that Rook deploy these components for a Rook-Ceph cluster. This design also proposes that Rook create a `CephObjectStoreUser` and refer to the credentials secret created by that controller.

Reviewer 2: Oxford commas are recommended in technical writing to be more clear about separation of items.

```suggestion
The controller, node adapter, and sidecar/driver need to be deployed. This design proposes that Rook deploy these components for a Rook-Ceph cluster. This design also proposes that Rook create a `CephObjectStoreUser` and refer to the credentials secret created by that controller.
```

Reviewer 2: What are alternatives to Rook deploying these components? Why do we choose to have Rook deploy them instead of having a separate deployment method?

Reviewer 2: Are there security risks with creating a `CephObjectStoreUser` for each request instead of creating the user direclty via API calls? Are there other reasons we choose to use the proposed method instead of creating things directly?

Author: I have mentioned deploying COSI Driver without using Rook in https://github.com/ceph/ceph-cosi/blob/master/README.md

`CephObjectStoreUser` is one-time creation for the cosi driver itself(like an admin user), not for the BARs handled by it
